scripts/README.adoc, before:

= ITU Operational Bulletin "Old Issue model" parsing

== Overview

The `itu-ob-data` directory contains data files ("OB Issues") from the ITU
Operational Bulletin (ITU-OB) in the "Old Issue model" format.

Each OB issue (located in `itu-ob-data/issues/{issue-no}`) contains information
about various amendments, general messages, and other communications related to
the ITU.

Each old issue is provided as a set of YAML files.
This is called the "Old Issue model".

`meta.yaml`:: The metadata about the issue (publication date, issue number,
etc.) This is straightforwardly structured and is parsed.

`general.yaml`:: General messages data and modifications to data in YAML format.
Each general message is either of a generic text format, or a structured
modification that represents a change to be made to a "general message dataset".
Each general message dataset uses a different structure and data fields.

`amendments.yaml`:: Modifications to amendment data in YAML format. Each
modification represents a change to be made to an "amendment dataset". Each
amendment dataset uses a different structure and data fields.

`annexes.yaml`, if available:: Annexes data in YAML format. This file
indicates when a new "annex" is added to the ITU-OB series, and is only present
or non-empty when a new annex is added.


== New dataset structure

Every dataset in the ITU OB has been formalized into new schemas and structures
in the `datasets/` directory.

WARNING: You do not need to change any content in the `datasets/` directory.

Each dataset is represented as a set of YAML files, with:

`metadata.yaml`:: The metadata about the dataset (publication date, issue
number, etc.). The schema for this file is defined at
`datasets/schema-metadata.yaml`.

`data.yaml` or `data/` directory:: The data for the dataset, which can be either
a single YAML file or a directory containing multiple YAML files. The data is
structured according to the specific schema defined for the dataset at
`schemas-data.yaml`.
+
NOTE: Every dataset has its own schema for its entries.



== Problem

Unfortunately, other than `meta.yaml`, most other data in each ITU-OB issue
is mostly provided in a text-format-centric structure (ProseMirror), which
is not reusable.

As part of the modernization effort to ITU-OB data, we are working to convert
these files into structured objects that can be easily accessed and analyzed.

NOTE: We have developed a ProseMirror gem (under `prosemirror/`) to assist
parsing the format into structured objects, which may require enhancements
along the way of this work.

The `datasets` directory contains fully structured raw ITU-OB issue data,
which is the destination structure of the parsed data.

An implementation in `ituob/` is provided to parse the Old Issue model
data into the structured data objects in `ituob/models/`.

The `ituob/models/` directory contains the data model classes that represent
the structured data objects for the ITU-OB issues. These classes are designed
to be reusable and extensible, allowing for easy addition of new data types
and structures as needed.

The `ituob/models/` directory contains the following important base classes:

`Ituob::Models::OldIssue`:: Represents an ITU-OB issue, containing metadata,
general messages, amendments, and annexes.

`Ituob::Models::Amendment`:: Represents an amendment to an ITU-OB issue,
containing information about the amendment type, date, and other relevant
data. This class is to be subclassed for each amendment type.

`Ituob::Models::GeneralMessage`:: Represents a general message in an ITU-OB
issue, containing information about the message type, date, and other
relevant data. This class is to be subclassed for each general message type.

`Ituob::Models::Entry`:: Represents an entry in an ITU-OB amendment
or general message, containing information about the entry type,
date, and other relevant data. This class is to be subclassed for each
entry type.


All models here utilize the
https://github.com/lutaml/lutaml-model[`lutaml-model`] library, which provides
serialization and deserialization support for the models. Please refer to its
documentation for more information on how to use it.


The information structure is as follows:

[source]
----
┌─────────────┐
│ Issue 1000  │
└─┬────┬───┬──┘
  │    │   │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │    │   └─→ │ IssueMetadata   │
  │    │       └─────────────────┘
  │    │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │    └─→ │ E118Amendment   │
  │        └──────┬──────────┘
  │               │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │               └─→ │ E118Action      │
  │                   └──────┬──────────┘
  │                          │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │                          └─→ │ E118Entry       │
  │                              └─────────────────┘
  │   ┌─────────────────┐
  └─→ │ IssueMetadata   │
      └───────┬─────────┘
              │   ┌────────────────────────────────┐
              └─→ │ GeneralApprovedRecommendations │
              │   └────────────────────────────────┘
              │   ┌────────────────────────────────┐
              └─→ │ GeneralRunningAnnexes          │
                  └────────────────────────────────┘
----



== Task

The task is to parse all Old Issue model data into the model structures
provided in the `ituob/`.

What is given:

* There is an integration script in `scripts/parse_issue.rb` that can be used to
  parse the Old Issue model data into the structured data objects.

* Currently, the following objects are parsed properly:

** Metadata

** Amendments

*** E118 amendments (the classes `E118Amendment`, `E118Action`,
`E118Entry` are implemented)

** General messages:
*** `GeneralRunningAnnexes`
*** `GeneralApprovedRecommendations`


What needs to be done:

* Extend the Amendments to support all the amendment types
(see `AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS` in `ituob/models/old_issue.rb`)
+
[source,ruby]
----
# TODO: Support more amendment types
AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS = {
  'E118_IIN' => E118Amendment,
  #  BUREAUFAX
  #  DP
  #  E164_ACN
  #  E164_CC
  #  E212_ICC
  #  E212_MNC
  #  E218_TRCC
  #  F32_TDI
  #  F400_ADMD
  #  List of Coast Stations and Special Service Stations
  #  M1400_ICC
  #  NNP
  #  Q708_ISPC
  #  Q708_SANC
  #  R_SP_LM.V
  #  R_SP_LN.VIII
  #  RR.25.1
  #  T35_NA
  #  X121_DNIC
}
----

* Extend the General messages to support all the general message types
(see `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` in `ituob/models/old_issue.rb`)
+
[source,ruby]
----
# TODO: Support more general types
GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS = {
  'running_annexes' => GeneralRunningAnnexes,
  'approved_recommendations' => GeneralApprovedRecommendations,
  # 'callback_procedures' => GeneralCallbackProcedures,
  # 'custom' => GeneralCustom,
  # 'ipns' => GeneralIpns,
  # 'iptn' => GeneralIptn,
  # 'misc_communications' => GeneralMiscCommunications,
  # 'org_changes' => GeneralOrgChanges,
  # 'sanc' => GeneralSanc,
  # 'service_restrictions' => GeneralServiceRestrictions,
  # 'telephone_service_2' => GeneralTelephoneService.
}
----

* Extend the `parse_issue.rb` script to parse all issues in the
  `itu-ob-data/issues/` directory.


== Usage

Run the `scripts/parse_issue.rb` test script as follows:

[source,sh]
----
$ cd scripts/
$ bundle install
$ bundle exec ./parse_issue.rb
----

Currently, the script only parses the issues 1000 and 1001. This should be
extended to parse all issues in the `itu-ob-data/issues/` directory.

The script parses the issue data and outputs it in YAML format to the console.


== Implementation approach

=== New amendment types

You need to first understand that Amendment data is currently represented in two
places:

`datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml`:: is the "today's data" of a dataset.

`issues/{issue-no}/amendments.yaml`:: contains previous changes ("patches"
  or "actions") to the dataset in the ProseMirror format.

The goal is to parse the latter into the former using the `ituob/models/`
classes.


The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `Amendment` base class.
+
[example]
The `E118Amendment` class is an example of an amendment type that has been
implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(hash, position_on: nil)` method
to process the raw data and define the necessary attributes to store the
parsed data.

. Create a new `Entry` subclass for each entry type that is specific to the
amendment type.
+
[example]
The `E118Entry` class is an example of an entry type that has been implemented.

.. This class needs to be able to read the corresponding
`dataset/{dataset-name}/data.yaml` file. This means you need to first understand
the YAML schema for the dataset defined in
`datasets/{dataset-name}/schema-data.yaml`.
+
[example]
====
The dataset file can be read using the `from_yaml` method of the `Entry` class.

[source,ruby]
----
# Both from_* methods provided by lutaml-model
E118Entry.from_yaml(IO.read('datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml'))
# or
E118Entry.from_hash(YAML.load('datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml'))
----
====

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(prosemirror_row)` method to process
the raw data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create a new `Action` subclass for each action type that is specific to the amendment type.
+
[example]
The `E118Action` class is an example of an action type that has been implemented.

. Add the new class to the `AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`


=== New general message types

==== General

There are 2 kinds of general message data:

"Dataset general messages":: General messages that are data sets represented in
the `datasets/` directory.

"Textual general messages":: General messages that are NOT structured data, but
rather a set of textual messages.

==== Dataset general messages

This is similar to the amendment types, where you need to create a new subclass
that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class, in a way similar to
`E118Amendment`.

Refer to the following files to see how a general message is implemented:

`ituob/models/general_message.rb`:: The base class for general messages.

`ituob/models/general_running_annexes.rb`:: An example of a general message
  type that has been implemented.

`ituob/models/general_approved_recommendations.rb`:: Another example of a
  general message type that has been implemented.


The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class.
+
[example]
The `GeneralRunningAnnexes` class is an example of a general message type that has
been implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(data)` method to process the raw
data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create any necessary subclasses for the specific data types that are used in
the general message type, such as `GeneralApprovedRecommendation` inside
`GeneralApprovedRecommendations`

. Add the new class to the `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`


==== Textual general messages

The goal is to store each textual general message in a separate YAML file under
a `ob-issues/{issue-no}/{textual-dataset-type}/` directory, with the
filename being a unique identifier of that general message type.

Since the textual general messages are not structured data, you can
create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class
that holds ProseMirror data.

The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class.
+
[example]
The `GeneralRunningAnnexes` class is an example of a general message type that has
been implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(data)` method to process the raw
data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create any necessary subclasses for the specific data types that are used in
the general message type, such as `GeneralApprovedRecommendation` inside
`GeneralApprovedRecommendations`

. Add the new class to the `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`



== Example

Here's a simplified example of how to parse a single issue directory:

[source,ruby]
----
require 'ituob'

# Path to a specific issue directory
issue_dir = '../itu-ob-data/issues/1000/'

# Parse the issue data
issue_data = Ituob::Models::OldIssue.load_issue_dir(issue_dir)

# Output the parsed data as YAML
puts issue_data.to_yaml
----


== Recommended workflow

. Study the existing working examples (E118Amendment, GeneralRunningAnnexes, etc.)

. Implement one amendment type or general message type at a time

. Test the implementation with actual issue data

. Repeat until all types are supported

. Verify that all issue directories can be parsed successfully


== Final goal

The final goal is to have all OB issues from the itu-ob-dataset parsed into
`OldIssues`, with full support for all amendment types and general message types.

This will enable the full migration of ITU OB Old Issue model data into the new
structured data format which does not rely on the ProseMirror structure (except
for the textual general messages).

Finally the goal is to have all ITU OB data in:

`ob-issue/{issue-no}`:: the structured data of an ITU OB issue

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{dataset-name}`:: the actions to the dataset defined in this issue.

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{dataset-name}/{action-id}`:: an action to the dataset

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{text-dataset-name}`:: the textual general messages

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{text-dataset-name}/{message-id}`:: a textual general message


== Copyright and license

Content copyright ITU.

Software and others, Ribose.

Commit message:

feat: extract prosemirror code to new released gem "prosereflect"

scripts/README.adoc, after:

= ITU Operational Bulletin "Old Issue model" parsing

== Overview

The `itu-ob-data` directory contains data files ("OB Issues") from the ITU
Operational Bulletin (ITU-OB) in the "Old Issue model" format.

Each OB issue (located in `itu-ob-data/issues/{issue-no}`) contains information
about various amendments, general messages, and other communications related to
the ITU.

Each old issue is provided as a set of YAML files.
This is called the "Old Issue model".

`meta.yaml`:: The metadata about the issue (publication date, issue number,
etc.) This is straightforwardly structured and is parsed.

`general.yaml`:: General messages data and modifications to data in YAML format.
Each general message is either of a generic text format, or a structured
modification that represents a change to be made to a "general message dataset".
Each general message dataset uses a different structure and data fields.

`amendments.yaml`:: Modifications to amendment data in YAML format. Each
modification represents a change to be made to an "amendment dataset". Each
amendment dataset uses a different structure and data fields.

`annexes.yaml`, if available:: Annexes data in YAML format. This file
indicates when a new "annex" is added to the ITU-OB series, and is only present
or non-empty when a new annex is added.


== New dataset structure

Every dataset in the ITU OB has been formalized into new schemas and structures
in the `datasets/` directory.

WARNING: You do not need to change any content in the `datasets/` directory.

Each dataset is represented as a set of YAML files, with:

`metadata.yaml`:: The metadata about the dataset (publication date, issue
number, etc.). The schema for this file is defined at
`datasets/schema-metadata.yaml`.

`data.yaml` or `data/` directory:: The data for the dataset, which can be either
a single YAML file or a directory containing multiple YAML files. The data is
structured according to the specific schema defined for the dataset at
`schemas-data.yaml`.
+
NOTE: Every dataset has its own schema for its entries.



== Problem

Unfortunately, other than `meta.yaml`, most other data in each ITU-OB issue
is mostly provided in a text-format-centric structure (ProseMirror), which
is not reusable.

As part of the modernization effort to ITU-OB data, we are working to convert
these files into structured objects that can be easily accessed and analyzed.

NOTE: We have developed a ProseMirror gem called
https://github.com/metanorma/prosereflect[`prosereflect`] to assist
parsing the format into structured objects, which may require enhancements
along the way of this work. Please feel free to PR any changes to the
`prosereflect` gem if you find any issues with the parsing.

The `datasets` directory contains fully structured raw ITU-OB issue data,
which is the destination structure of the parsed data.

An implementation in `ituob/` is provided to parse the Old Issue model
data into the structured data objects in `ituob/models/`.

The `ituob/models/` directory contains the data model classes that represent
the structured data objects for the ITU-OB issues. These classes are designed
to be reusable and extensible, allowing for easy addition of new data types
and structures as needed.

The `ituob/models/` directory contains the following important base classes:

`Ituob::Models::OldIssue`:: Represents an ITU-OB issue, containing metadata,
general messages, amendments, and annexes.

`Ituob::Models::Amendment`:: Represents an amendment to an ITU-OB issue,
containing information about the amendment type, date, and other relevant
data. This class is to be subclassed for each amendment type.

`Ituob::Models::GeneralMessage`:: Represents a general message in an ITU-OB
issue, containing information about the message type, date, and other
relevant data. This class is to be subclassed for each general message type.

`Ituob::Models::Entry`:: Represents an entry in an ITU-OB amendment
or general message, containing information about the entry type,
date, and other relevant data. This class is to be subclassed for each
entry type.


All models here utilize the
https://github.com/lutaml/lutaml-model[`lutaml-model`] library, which provides
serialization and deserialization support for the models. Please refer to its
documentation for more information on how to use it.


The information structure is as follows:

[source]
----
┌─────────────┐
│ Issue 1000  │
└─┬────┬───┬──┘
  │    │   │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │    │   └─→ │ IssueMetadata   │
  │    │       └─────────────────┘
  │    │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │    └─→ │ E118Amendment   │
  │        └──────┬──────────┘
  │               │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │               └─→ │ E118Action      │
  │                   └──────┬──────────┘
  │                          │   ┌─────────────────┐
  │                          └─→ │ E118Entry       │
  │                              └─────────────────┘
  │   ┌─────────────────┐
  └─→ │ IssueMetadata   │
      └───────┬─────────┘
              │   ┌────────────────────────────────┐
              └─→ │ GeneralApprovedRecommendations │
              │   └────────────────────────────────┘
              │   ┌────────────────────────────────┐
              └─→ │ GeneralRunningAnnexes          │
                  └────────────────────────────────┘
----



== Task

The task is to parse all Old Issue model data into the model structures
provided in the `ituob/`.

What is given:

* There is an integration script in `scripts/parse_issue.rb` that can be used to
  parse the Old Issue model data into the structured data objects.

* Currently, the following objects are parsed properly:

** Metadata

** Amendments

*** E118 amendments (the classes `E118Amendment`, `E118Action`,
`E118Entry` are implemented)

** General messages:
*** `GeneralRunningAnnexes`
*** `GeneralApprovedRecommendations`


What needs to be done:

* Extend the Amendments to support all the amendment types
(see `AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS` in `ituob/models/old_issue.rb`)
+
[source,ruby]
----
# TODO: Support more amendment types
AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS = {
  'E118_IIN' => E118Amendment,
  #  BUREAUFAX
  #  DP
  #  E164_ACN
  #  E164_CC
  #  E212_ICC
  #  E212_MNC
  #  E218_TRCC
  #  F32_TDI
  #  F400_ADMD
  #  List of Coast Stations and Special Service Stations
  #  M1400_ICC
  #  NNP
  #  Q708_ISPC
  #  Q708_SANC
  #  R_SP_LM.V
  #  R_SP_LN.VIII
  #  RR.25.1
  #  T35_NA
  #  X121_DNIC
}
----

* Extend the General messages to support all the general message types
(see `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` in `ituob/models/old_issue.rb`)
+
[source,ruby]
----
# TODO: Support more general types
GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS = {
  'running_annexes' => GeneralRunningAnnexes,
  'approved_recommendations' => GeneralApprovedRecommendations,
  # 'callback_procedures' => GeneralCallbackProcedures,
  # 'custom' => GeneralCustom,
  # 'ipns' => GeneralIpns,
  # 'iptn' => GeneralIptn,
  # 'misc_communications' => GeneralMiscCommunications,
  # 'org_changes' => GeneralOrgChanges,
  # 'sanc' => GeneralSanc,
  # 'service_restrictions' => GeneralServiceRestrictions,
  # 'telephone_service_2' => GeneralTelephoneService.
}
----

* Extend the `parse_issue.rb` script to parse all issues in the
  `itu-ob-data/issues/` directory.


== Usage

Run the `scripts/parse_issue.rb` test script as follows:

[source,sh]
----
$ cd scripts/
$ bundle install
$ bundle exec ./parse_issue.rb
----

Currently, the script only parses the issues 1000 and 1001. This should be
extended to parse all issues in the `itu-ob-data/issues/` directory.

The script parses the issue data and outputs it in YAML format to the console.


== Implementation approach

=== New amendment types

You need to first understand that Amendment data is currently represented in two
places:

`datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml`:: is the "today's data" of a dataset.

`issues/{issue-no}/amendments.yaml`:: contains previous changes ("patches"
  or "actions") to the dataset in the ProseMirror format.

The goal is to parse the latter into the former using the `ituob/models/`
classes.


The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `Amendment` base class.
+
[example]
The `E118Amendment` class is an example of an amendment type that has been
implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(hash, position_on: nil)` method
to process the raw data and define the necessary attributes to store the
parsed data.

. Create a new `Entry` subclass for each entry type that is specific to the
amendment type.
+
[example]
The `E118Entry` class is an example of an entry type that has been implemented.

.. This class needs to be able to read the corresponding
`dataset/{dataset-name}/data.yaml` file. This means you need to first understand
the YAML schema for the dataset defined in
`datasets/{dataset-name}/schema-data.yaml`.
+
[example]
====
The dataset file can be read using the `from_yaml` method of the `Entry` class.

[source,ruby]
----
# Both from_* methods provided by lutaml-model
E118Entry.from_yaml(IO.read('datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml'))
# or
E118Entry.from_hash(YAML.load('datasets/{dataset-name}/data.yaml'))
----
====

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(prosemirror_row)` method to process
the raw data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create a new `Action` subclass for each action type that is specific to the amendment type.
+
[example]
The `E118Action` class is an example of an action type that has been implemented.

. Add the new class to the `AMENDMENT_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`


=== New general message types

==== General

There are 2 kinds of general message data:

"Dataset general messages":: General messages that are data sets represented in
the `datasets/` directory.

"Textual general messages":: General messages that are NOT structured data, but
rather a set of textual messages.

==== Dataset general messages

This is similar to the amendment types, where you need to create a new subclass
that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class, in a way similar to
`E118Amendment`.

Refer to the following files to see how a general message is implemented:

`ituob/models/general_message.rb`:: The base class for general messages.

`ituob/models/general_running_annexes.rb`:: An example of a general message
  type that has been implemented.

`ituob/models/general_approved_recommendations.rb`:: Another example of a
  general message type that has been implemented.


The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class.
+
[example]
The `GeneralRunningAnnexes` class is an example of a general message type that has
been implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(data)` method to process the raw
data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create any necessary subclasses for the specific data types that are used in
the general message type, such as `GeneralApprovedRecommendation` inside
`GeneralApprovedRecommendations`

. Add the new class to the `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`


==== Textual general messages

The goal is to store each textual general message in a separate YAML file under
a `ob-issues/{issue-no}/{textual-dataset-type}/` directory, with the
filename being a unique identifier of that general message type.

Since the textual general messages are not structured data, you can
create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class
that holds ProseMirror data.

The steps are as follows:

. Create a new subclass that inherits from the `GeneralMessage` base class.
+
[example]
The `GeneralRunningAnnexes` class is an example of a general message type that has
been implemented.

.. This class should implement the `self.parse(data)` method to process the raw
data and define the necessary attributes to store the parsed data.

. Create any necessary subclasses for the specific data types that are used in
the general message type, such as `GeneralApprovedRecommendation` inside
`GeneralApprovedRecommendations`

. Add the new class to the `GENERAL_TYPE_TO_CLASS` hash in `old_issue.rb`



== Example

Here's a simplified example of how to parse a single issue directory:

[source,ruby]
----
require 'ituob'

# Path to a specific issue directory
issue_dir = '../itu-ob-data/issues/1000/'

# Parse the issue data
issue_data = Ituob::Models::OldIssue.load_issue_dir(issue_dir)

# Output the parsed data as YAML
puts issue_data.to_yaml
----


== Recommended workflow

. Study the existing working examples (E118Amendment, GeneralRunningAnnexes, etc.)

. Implement one amendment type or general message type at a time

. Test the implementation with actual issue data

. Repeat until all types are supported

. Verify that all issue directories can be parsed successfully


== Final goal

The final goal is to have all OB issues from the itu-ob-dataset parsed into
`OldIssues`, with full support for all amendment types and general message types.

This will enable the full migration of ITU OB Old Issue model data into the new
structured data format which does not rely on the ProseMirror structure (except
for the textual general messages).

Finally the goal is to have all ITU OB data in:

`ob-issue/{issue-no}`:: the structured data of an ITU OB issue

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{dataset-name}`:: the actions to the dataset defined in this issue.

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{dataset-name}/{action-id}`:: an action to the dataset

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{text-dataset-name}`:: the textual general messages

`ob-issue/{issue-no}/{text-dataset-name}/{message-id}`:: a textual general message


== Copyright and license

Content copyright ITU.

Software and others, Ribose.
